---
title: Trial lecture notes
author: Rohith Krishna
date: 22 November 2020
layout: post
permalink: /2020-11-11-trial
tags: [coupon date, fixed income models]
typora-root-url: ../../rohithmay.github.io
---

16 November 2020

# Introduction

- **Bonds and debentures are known as fixed income securities**. They are a type of *financial claims or securities*.
- The idea of a *claim* is this: as long as your money is with an entity you have a claim against that entity.   The entity we refer to in this course is usually the government or a corporate. Thus, bonds, equity shares, preferred shares etc. are types of financial claims.

**Who issues the claim?** *It is always the entity taking the money.* **Who holds the claim?** *It is the party giving the money.*

- The claim is an asset for the holder, for they own something of value. While the claim is a liability for the issuer, for they owe something of value.

- Note. If we add up all financial assets and liabilities, it will amount to zero.

- Difference between debt and equity

   is this: If you buy an equity share, you become a part owner of the business. However, if you buy a debt security, you do not become a part owner. It is merely an IOU.

  - Debt is a promise to pay interest at periodic intervals, and,
  - To repay the principal at a pre-specified maturity date.

- Usually, **debt has a finite life span**. Perpetual debt is possible, but rare. However, equity is always a perpetuity. Why? Because a company that is going concern is assumed to meet all its financial obligations when they are due.

- In ancient Europe, there were securities by the name  Consols (consolidated stock). These were government  debt securities that were perpetuities.

- **Interest payments are contractual obligations**. And the borrowers are required to pay these irrespective of their financial performance.

- **Interest payments are to be made before any dividends are paid out to equity holders**. In the preference ladder, bond-holders are higher than equity holder and hence usually have lesser returns than equity holders who take up greater risk.

- In the event of liquidation, the claims of debt holders is to be settled first. Only then can equity holders be paid.

Bonds are called fixed income securities. Why? Consider a company issuing bond saying it will pay 6% interest. This company cannot say that business is dull and offer 4% interest. Likewise, the investor (bond-holder) cannot say that business is booming. Therefore, offer me 8%. All returns are contractually agree upon and fixed.

- Bonds and debentures are fixed income securities because the interest rate is set at the onset of the due period and failure to pay is tantamount to default.

Returns for bonds is not a function of profitability of the firm.

### Bonds and debentures

- Bonds may be secured or unsecured. Secured means that a specific asset has been earmarked as collateral. This means that if the company gets into difficulties, then the asset can be sold to pay the bondholders. Whereas, in an unsecured debt, no asset has been earmarked. The holders can only hope that the issuer has enough assets and liquidity at the time of payment.
- Secured debt holders are prioritized in the standpoint of payments at the time of liquidity. Thus, secured debt holders > unsecured debt holders > equity holders.
- In the US, unsecured debt is called a bond and secured debt is called a debenture. These are used interchangeably in India.
- Worldwide, government securities are called bonds. Government debentures (wherein a government gives a collateral) is unheard of. Also, the only security that a government can issue is a bond.
- Governments do not give collateral. But municipal bonds can give collateral. Suppose a new bridge is build across a river and that is financed using bonds, then a usage toll collected is used to pay off the bond-holders. These are called revenue bonds where specific revenue stream is given as collateral.

### Negotiable debt securities

- Debt securities may be negotiable or non-negotiable.

   Negotiable securities can be traded in the market. Some debt securities are negotiable, while others are not.

  - A Fixed Deposit receipt or a National Savings Certificate are non-negotiable.
  - Say you have an FD with SBI for Rs.200000. You cannot endorse this receipt and transfer it to someone who you owe money. Instead you must close the account and withdraw the cash and pay the person who you owe.
  - Likewise, National Savings Certificate are used for tax saving purposes. At maturity, you get principal + interest. Before maturity, if you need money, you may pledge the NSC and borrow. But you cannot transfer the NSC - it is non-negotiable.
  - However, many corporate and government bonds are negotiable. They can be traded.

### Plain Vanilla vs Bells & Whistles

- The most basic form of a security is known as Plain Vanilla version. Any security which is something more than plain vanilla is said to have Bells & Whistles attached.
  - Say, Face value = 1000, interest = 8%pa, payable for 5 years. - this is plain vanilla with no additional features.
  - However, say, Face value - 1000, payable in 5 equal annual installments. And interest is 8% on the outstanding principal at the start of the year. - this is Bells and Whistles attached.
  - Say, the bond can be converted after two years to equity shares, this again has Bells & Whistles attached.

### Floating Rate and Variable Rate bonds

- Fixed rate bonds have a fixed interest rate for the life of the security. For example, if I issue a 5-year bond of 8% pa on a face value of Rs.1000 I will get Rs. 80 every year for 5 years.
- But suppose I say, interest is MIBOR + 1%,  and
  - if MIBOR is 3%, the first payment will be  4% of 1000, that is Rs.40
  - if 6 months later, MIBOR is 5%, the second payment will be 6% of 1000, that is Rs. 60.
  - Higher the benchmark rate (MIBOR here), higher is the interest rate and vice-versa.
- If the benchmark is short term (with maturity less than 1 year) then it is a floating rate bond.  Example, Interest is 3 month MIBOR + 1% is a floating rate bond.
- However, if the benchmark is long-term then it is a variable rate bond. Example, Interest is the 10 year GSec rate + 1%, it is a variable rate bond.

### Bonds with embedded options

- Convertible bonds can be converted into shares of a stock.
- Callable bonds can be prematurely recalled by the issuer. Before maturity, the issuer can say, take the principal and return the bond (claim).
- Putable bonds can prematurely surrendered by the holders. Before maturity, the holders can say, take the bond and give me the principal.
- Callable, putable and convertible are all bonds with Bells and Whistles.

### Terms

- Face value is also called par value, redemption value, maturity value or principal. A bond must have a face value.
  - It is the amount payable by the issuer to the last holder at maturity.  Why last holder? Because the holder can trade the security - negotiable security.
  - It is also the amount on which the periodic interest payments are calculated.
- Term to maturity, tenor, tenure - all mean the same.
  - It is the length of time after which the principal has to be paid back to the last holder.
  - It is the length of time for which periodic interest payments have to be made.
  - OTM - original term to maturity - this is the maturity at the time of issue - static - doesn't change.
  - ATM - actual time to maturity - right now, what is the term to maturity - decreases as each day passes and you get closer to maturity.
- **Coupon** is the periodic interest payable by the issuer of the bond. In earlier days, bonds would come with a booklet of coupons. These were like post-dated cheques. Every 6 months, one had to tear the coupon and claim the interest.  These days, the RBI takes the account number and does an electronic transfer. Even today, there are bonds that comes with coupons.  Most bonds pay coupons semiannually; Eurobonds pay annually.
- Difference between a registered bond and a bearer bond.
  - Bearer bond is like a currency note. It belongs to whoever has it. There is no record of ownership.
  - Registered bond have a record of who own how many bonds at that point in time.
  - To collect the coupon on a bearer bond, the holder has to present a coupon from the booklet.

Let $c$ be the coupon rate and $M$  be the face value. Then the Rupee or Dollar value of the periodic interest payment to be paid by the borrower is the coupon rate and is given by $\text{coupon} = c \times M$.

- Yield to Maturity (YTM) - is the rate of return for an investor who buys at the prevailing price and holds it to maturity.  It is similar to the IRR for a project. You invest money and take money back - as we see in a project.

- To get the YTM, the conditions to be satisfied are:

  1. The bond must be held till maturity.
  2. All cash flows received prior to maturity must be reinvested at the YTM till maturity.

- At any point of time YTM may be less than, equal to or greater than the coupon rate.

  > **Descartes' Rule of Signs** The maximum number of real positive IRRs is equal to the number of sign changes.

- Pure Cash flows involve only a single sign change. A mixed cash flow has multiple sign changes.

- A pure cash flow will have only one IRR. Mixed cash flows may have upto 3 positive IRRs or more depending on the number of sign changes.

- Pure and Mixed Cash Flows care also called normal and non-normal cash flows respectively.



**YTM is the solution to a nonlinear equation**. → Thus they are solved iteratively. **Bonds involve only pure cash flows** → Thus only one real positive YTM exists.

- If there are $n$ cash flows, the YTM is the solution to a polynomial of degree $n$. So it will have $n$ roots and therefore will have to be solved iteratively.
- If there are only 2 cash flows, then we have a quadratic equation, whose solution gives the YTM.
- For a single cash flow, YTM can be easily solved by simple algebraic manipulation.

### Value of a bond

- The value of a bond cannot be just its face value. It cannot also just be the face value plus the sum of all coupon payments. Why? Because of time value of money.
- A holder of a bond gets a stream of contractually promised payments: the coupons and at maturity, the face value. **The value of the bond is the value of the stream of cash flows discounted and added.**

### Price vs. Yield

Price vs. Yield is a hen and egg story. Because, when I go to the market, I have a required yield in mind. On that basis, I will quote a price. If I get my price or a better price, I will trade. Once I trade at a price, I can work back and compute my yield. Knowing price enables you to calculate yield and vice versa

### Bond valuation

- A bond will pay identical coupons every period, and the face value at maturity. The periodic cash flows constitute an annuity. The terminal face value is a lump sum payment.

**Note**: An annuity is a series of identical cash flows at equally spaced intervals. Insurance premiums, rent for apartments, salaries etc. are annuities.

Consider a bond with annual coupon rate of $c$. We know that semiannually, the coupon rate is $c/2$.  Let it pay a semi-annual coupon of $C/2$ dollars and have a face value (fv) of $M$ dollars. The relation $C = c \times M$ holds. Assume that there are N coupons left and we are standing on a coupon date. (Today morning, we have just received a coupon and the next coupon is exactly 6 months aw.) Let $y$ be the required annual yield. (Yield is the rate of return required or YTM). This means that the semi-annual yield is $y/2$.

The present value of the coupon stream is given by:

$$\text{PV(coupons)} = \frac{C/2}{y/2}\Bigg[ 1 - \frac{1}{(1+\frac{y}{2})^N}\Bigg] \\\text{PV(coupons)} = \frac{c \times M}{y}\Bigg[ 1 - \frac{1}{(1+\frac{y}{2})^N}\Bigg]$$

If $M$ is the face value(fv) then the present value of the face value at maturity is given by:

$$\text{PV(face-value)} = \frac{M}{(1+\frac{y}{2})^N}$$

Thus, the price of the bond is given by the sum of present values (PV) of coupon stream and face value.

$$\text{Bond Price} = \frac{c\times M}{y}\Bigg[ 1 - \frac{1}{(1+\frac{y}{2})^N}\Bigg] + \frac{M}{(1+\frac{y}{2})^N}$$

The coupons are paid semi-annually and so we discount them semi-annually. However the face value is paid lump sum. Why cannot we discount it annually? *Because, the method of discounting must be consistent for all the cash flows. You cannot discount coupons semi-annually and face value annually.*

**Example**. IBM has issued a bond with fv = 1000, coupon is 8% pa to be paid on July 15 and Jan 15 every year (semi-annually). Today is 15 July 2013. The bond matures on 15 Jan 2033. The required yield (YTM) is 10% pa. What is the bond price?

**Solution.** The number of periods, N is 39 coupon-receiving months in 19.5 years, that is 39 coupons. Simply plug these values into the above formula:

$$\text{PV} = \frac{0.04\times 1000}{0.05}\Bigg[ 1 - \frac{1}{(1+\frac{0.1}{2})^{39}}\Bigg] + \frac{1000}{(1+\frac{0.1}{2})^{39}} \approx 830 $$

One can solve this problem in Excel using the `PV` function, since we are standing on a coupon data.  The parameters for this function are `PV(rate, nper, pmt, [fv], [type])`. Here, `rate = 5%` , which is 10% pa YTM divided by 2, to obtain semi-annual yield rate. `nper = 39` , which is 19.5 years times 2. We specify cash inflows as negative. Thus, `pmt = -40` , which is semi-annual coupon rate of face value, 4% of 1000 and finally, the face value `fv = -1000` .

Thus, `PV(0.05, 39, -40, -1000) = 829.83` . That is, the price of the bond is $829.83.

**PV function in excel** If you are on a coupon date, you can use the `PV` function in Excel to calculate the bond price. The `PV` function has the parameters:  `PV(rate, nper, pmt, [fv], [type])`

`rate` -  periodic discount rate, YTM  $y$  (yield rate per period: check if coupon is semi-annual or annual. If semi-annual coupons, then divide the per-annum YTM by 2, that is $y/2$.

`nper` - number of payment periods, $N$. For semi-annual coupons, this is 2 times number of years, $2\times N$.

`pmt` - payment made each period (coupon amount),  $C =  cM$. Note. Cashflows in one direction are positive while the other direction are negative. So if you give these inflows as negative, `PV` function returns a positive number.

`[fv]` - face value; optional. This is the last payment that is made at the end, corresponding to the second term in the above equation. If omitted, this means a zero face value. Make sure to be consistent with the sign convention of cashflow.

`[type]` -  an optional variable to denote when the payments are due, where 0 denotes end of the period [default], while 1 denotes the beginning of the period.

### Par, discount and premium bonds

- If the price of a bond is less than its face value, it is called a

  discount bond.

   If the price is more than the face value, it is called a

  premium bond.

   If the price is equal to the face value, it is called a

  par bond.

  - Par bond: yield = coupon;  bond price= face value.
  - Premium bond: yield < coupon;  bond price > face value.
  - Discount bond: yield > coupon;  bond price < face value.

- *Why is the bond at discount? Rather, why is the bond priced lesser than its face value?* This is because the yield is more than the coupon rate. Yield is the return demanded by the market, while coupon is the return provided by the issuer. So, if the market wants a higher return, it will bring down the price. **Remember, price and yield are inversely related.**

### Pull to Par Effect

Let us keep the YTM fixed and move from one coupon date to the next. Then, the pull to par effect tells us that,

- par bonds would continue to trade at par.
- premium bonds will steadily decline in price, and
- discount bonds will steadily increase in price.
- At maturity, all bonds must trade at par.

As we go from one coupon date to the next, one coupon drops out. This reduces the price. But the face value is discounted for one period less. This pulls up the price. For discount bonds, the second effect dominates, for premium bonds the first effect dominates, while for par bonds both effects cancel each other.

| face value, fv    | 1000    |                        |
| ----------------- | ------- | ---------------------- |
| YTM               | 0.075   | pa                     |
| coupon rate, c    | 0.065   | pa, paid semi annually |
| time to maturity  | 6       | years                  |
| number of periods | 12      | (semi-annual)          |
| coupon amount, C  | 32.5    | ie., 3.25% of 1000     |
| PV                | $952.39 |                        |