---
title: Arithmetico-geometric mean (agM) of two numbers
author: Rohith Krishna
date: 21 June 2020
layout: post
category: Physics
description:
tags: agm
---

This post is part of a series on the relation between the *arithmetic-geometric mean* (herein denoted as agM), the  *lemniscate*, the *Gaussian elliptic integrals* and the *time period of a simple pendulum*.

Here we define the algorithm for computing the arithmetic-geometric mean (agM) of two numbers and study some properties. In subsequent posts, we shall attempt to prove the theorem of Gauss which establishes the relation between agM and elliptic integrals. Later, we make use of this theorem to derive approximations to the time period of a simple pendulum, that fares much better than usual perturbation theories.

$$ \int dx = x $$

### The agM

The arithmetic-geometric mean of Gauss is a rapidly converging sequence. Given two numbers, $$a$$ and $$b$$ one could find their arithmetic mean and geometric mean. The latter two numbers lie in between the two given numbers on the number line. Now this process could be iterated, by finding the arithmetic mean and geometric mean of the newly obtained numbers. The resulting series converges rapidly into a number called the arithmetic-geometric mean, $$M(a,b)$$ and the iterative process is denoted by agM. The study of the arclength of ellipses and lemniscates resulted in elliptic integrals, which could not be analytically evaluated by standard functions. Gauss succeeded in proving the incredible relation between elliptic integrals and the arithmetic-geometric mean. This was used to find better approximations for $$\pi$$. Later, it was found that the period of the simple pendulum could be expressed like those non-elementary functions relating to lemniscates, and thus could be solved, exactly, using agM method. This is investigated here. The advantage this method has over power series expansion is also discussed.

### Historical note

The algorithm for the agM was used by Lagrange in 1785, for calculating the approximations for elliptic integrals, although he did not discover its relation with elliptic integrals. It was in 1791, that Gauss discovered this peculiar relation. In 1818, his treatise *Determinatio attractionis* (On the attraction of the elliptic ring), contains a proof of his theorem relating agM and elliptic integrals, although he has recorded it in his diary in 1799, itself. It can also be seen from Gauss’ diaries that he attached significance to the argument pair of $$(\sqrt{2},1)$$, in his work on agM. The book in [1] provides insight into the history of the arithmetic geometric mean.

### Analysis

**Definition**. Let $$a\geq0$$ and $$b\geq0$$ be two numbers such that $$a\geq b\geq0$$. Define the numbers $$a_0$$ and $$b_0$$ (taken as primers for the algorithm) by $$a_0:=a$$ and $$b_0:=b;$$ then for $$n=0,1,2,…$$ define the sequences $${a_n}$$ and $${b_n}$$ by

$$a_{n+1}:=\frac{a_n+b_n}{2}$$

$$b_{n+1}:=\sqrt{a_nb_n}$$

It is to be noted that each $$a_{n+1}$$ is the *arithmetic mean* of the previous $$a_n$$ and $$b_n$$, while each $$b_{n+1}$$ is the *geometric mean* of the same two numbers. The sequences $$\{a_n\}$$ and $$\{b_n\}$$ are used to define the **arithmetic-geometric mean algorithm**, which is abbreviated as **agM**. The following properties of agM can be quickly observed:

**Property 1.** $$\{a_n\}$$ is a decreasing sequence, while $\{b_n\}$ is a increasing sequence. That is, $$
a_0\geq a_1\geq...\geq a_n\geq a_{n+1} \geq b_{n+1} \geq b_n \geq ...\geq b_1\geq b_0$$.

*Proof*. Since the square of a real number is always non-negative, it follows that, for $$n=0,1,2,…$$, $$(a_n-b_n)^2\geq 0$$ and that there is a strict inequality unless $$a_n=b_n$$. Therefore,

$$\begin{eqnarray}
a_n^2+b_n^2-2a_nb_n &\geq& 0\\
a_n^2+b_n^2-2a_nb_n+4a_nb_n &\geq& 4a_nb_n\\
a_n^2+b_n^2+2a_nb_n &\geq& 4a_nb_n\\
(a_n+b_n)^2 &\geq& 4a_nb_n\\
\frac{(a_n+b_n)^2}{4} &\geq& 4a_nb_n \\
\frac{a_n+b_n}{2} &\geq& \sqrt{a_nb_n}\end{eqnarray}$$


The equation ([d]), of course, is the arithmetic-mean geometric mean
inequality. On applying this to $a_{n+1}$ and $b_{n+1}$, one obtains
$a_{n+1}\geq b_{n+1}$. Thus, from $a_{n}\geq b_{n}$ and
$a_{n+1}\geq b_{n+1}$,

$$a_n \geq \frac{a_n+b_n}{2}=:a_{n+1} \geq b_{n+1} :=\frac{a_n-b_n}{2}$$

which is (Property 1).



**Property 2.** We see that $$0\leq a_n-b_n \leq \frac{a-b}{2^n}$$.

**Property 3.** The limits $$A:=\lim_{n\to\infty}a_n$$ and $$B:=\lim_{n\to\infty}b_n$$ both exist and are equal, $$A=B.$$

*Proof of the Property 1

*Proof. Of* ([b])\
From $b_{n+1}\geq b_n$, one could conclude that
$$a_{n+1}-b_{n+1}\leq a_{n+1}-b_n=\frac{a_n+b_n}{2}-b_n=\frac{a_n-b_n}{2}$$
and ([b]) follows by induction.

*Proof. Of* ([c])\
By ([a]), the sequence $\{a_n\}$ decreases monotonically and is bounded
from below by $b_0$; therefore, A exists. Similarly, by ([a]), the
sequence $\{b_n\}$ increases monotonically and is bounded from above by
$a_0$; therefore, B exists. Now, letting $n$ to infinity in ([b]) and
using the limits in ([c]), one obtains, $0\leq A-B \leq 0$; therefore,by
the ’sandwich theorem’, $A=B$.

Now, based on the aforementioned properties, the definition for agM can
be established as follows.

The **arithmetic-geometric mean**, $M(a,b)\equiv\mu$ of the numbers $a$
and $b$ is defined to be the common limit

$$M(a,b)\equiv \mu:=A:=\lim_{n\to\infty}a_n \equiv B:= \lim_{n\to\infty}b_n$$

of the agM as applied to the numbers $a$ and $b$.

From this definition, it is obvious that the following properties hold
true:

$$\begin{gathered}
M(a,a)=a \label{1a}
\\ M(a,b)=M(b,a) \label{1b}
\\ M(a,b)=M(a_0,b_0)=M(a_1,b_1)=...=M(a_n,b_n) \label{1c}
\\ M(a,b)=M\Big(\frac{a+b}{2},\sqrt{ab}\Big) \label{1d}
\\ M(a,b)=M(a+\sqrt{a^2-b^2},a-\sqrt{a^2-b^2})
\label{1e}
\\ M(ka,kb)=kM(a.b)
\label{1f}\end{gathered}$$

The geometric mean $b_n$ is a closer approximation to $\mu$ than $a_n$,
that is,

$$0< \frac{\mu-b_n}{a_n-\mu} <1$$

*Proof.* It can be observed that, $$\mu<a_{n+1}= \frac{a_n+b_n}{2}
\Rightarrow 2\mu<a_n+b_n
\Rightarrow \mu-b_n<a_n-\mu$$ Since $0<\mu-b_n<a_n-\mu$, one could
divide by $a_n-\mu$ in order to complete the proof.

[h] [tab1]

<span>llll</span> $n$ &

$a_n$ &

$b_n$ & Digits of Accuracy\
0 & 1.414213562373905048802 & 1.000000000000000000000 &

0\
1 & 1.207106781186547524401 & 1.189207115002721066717 &

0\
2 & 1.198156948094634295559 & 1.198123521493120122607 &

4\
3 & 1.198140234793877209083 & 1.198140234677307205798 &

9\
4 & 1.198140234735592207441 & 1.198140234735592207439 &

19

\

$$\label{j}
M(\sqrt{2},1)=1.1981402347355922074$$

Table [tab1] illustrates the solution of the recursion relations in [e]
for $(a,b)=(\sqrt{2},1).$ Just after four iterations an agreement of
$19$ decimal places between the two means is obtained. This suggests
that the agM rapidly converges. The work by Carvalhaes and Suppes shows
the convergence rate. If a measure of of error $c_n$ is introduced in
the $n$th iteration as

$$c_n=\sqrt{a_n^2-b_n^2}$$

it is observed that

$$\begin{eqnarray}
c_{n+1} &=& \sqrt{a_{n+1}^2-b_{n+1}^2} \\
c_{n+1} &=& \sqrt{\frac{(a_n+b_n)^2}{4}-a_n b_n} \\
c_{n+1} &=& \sqrt{\frac{a_n^2+b_n^2+2a_nb_n-4a_nb_n}{4}} \\
c_{n+1} &=& \frac{a_n-b_n}{2} \cdot \frac{a_{n+1}}{a_{n+1}}\end{eqnarray}$$

$$c_{n+1}=\frac{c_n^2}{4a_{n+1}}.$$

Since the sequence $\{c_n\}$ goes to $0$ quadratic manner, the
convergence of the arithmetic-geometric means is quadratic. Therefore,
an agreement of about $2^n$ digits between the means is observed after n
iterations.

References

1. Arndt, Jörg, and Christoph Haenel. *Pi-unleashed*. Springer Science & Business Media, 2001.
